your brothers and sisters in Islam net
from Norway are establishing a mid a DA
Center this Center this mid this
educational institution will act like a
beacon of light calling the Muslims in
Norway back to the essence of Islam so
give generously and Allah will give you
even
[Music]
more how are you guys guys doing and
welcome to another episode of the MH
podcast one of the most irregular
podcasts on the internet but we're
joined with a very special guest whose
book I've just read cover to cover a
fantastic one at that it's called
dopamine nation and it's all about uh
addiction it's all about dopamine it's
all about how you can moderate yourself
it's all about how you can get a balance
between pain and pleasure in life and
we're going to be exploring that but
just a quick introduction uh on the
Professor um Anna lmy is a professor of
psycholog uh Psychiatry at Stanford
University School of Medicine and chief
of the Stanford addiction medicine dual
diagnos diagnosis Clinic a clinician
scholar she has published more than a
100 peer review papers books chapters
and commentaries she sits on the board
of several State and National addiction
Focus organizations has testified before
various committees in the United States
uh House of Representatives and Senate
keeps an active speaking calendar and
maintains a thriving clinical practice
uh in 2016 she published uh drug dealer
and of course she's also published
dopamine nation which is book that I
have just referenced that how are you
doctor I'm doing well thank you how are
you doing not bad at all we're in the
month the holy month of Ramadan and uh
we're partaking in fasting which of
course you kind of mention but you
definitely allude to restricted
practices like fasting in your book um
what I wanted to do is start off by
asking simple questions sure so what is
dopamine and why is it
important dopamine is a chemical that we
make in our brains it is a
neurotransmitter neurotransmitters are
molecules that bridge the gap between
neurons neurons are those long spindly
cells that work by conducting an
electrical signal from one to another
and they don't touch end to end there's
a space between them that space is
called the synapse and it's bridged by
molecules or chemicals called
neurotransmitters and dopamine is one of
those
neurotransmitters dopamine is essential
for the experience of pleasure reward
and
motivation we have a dedicated circuit
in our in our brains called the reward
pathway that is rich in dopamine
releasing neurons and it's where we
mediate the experience of pleasure also
happens to be collocated with where we
mediate the experience of pain um and
it's also the neurotransmitter uh that
can get out of balance when people go
from recreational adaptive use of a
substance or behavior to addictive
maladaptive use dopamine is also really
important for movement and it's probably
no coincidence that the same
neurotransmitter involved in pleasure
reward motivation is also important for
movement because for most of uh an
organism's existence it has to move and
do work to get the rewards that it needs
to survive that's actually no longer
true for many humans on the planet which
is part of the problem that we're
facing so um you mentioned that dopamine
is is very very important for you know
pleasure and there are other things that
um have been mentioned and also
prescribed um well not necessarily
prescribed in the sense that now if
people get anti-depressants they get
something called
ssris uh which tackles or deals with or
inhibits serotonin so why is it that
we're for example prescribed serotonin
Inhibitors and not dopamine inhibitors
for example why why why the focus on
serotonin yeah so um antidepressants
actually function by not by inhibiting
serotonin but by augmenting serotonin uh
in the brain they do that by inhibiting
an enzyme that breaks the serotonin down
or actually brings it back up into the
Pres synaptic neuron but independent of
the specific mechanism the net effect is
to make for more serotonin and we know
that serotonin is one of our what we
would call feel-good neurotransmitters
along with dopamine and nephrine it's a
part of the monoamine system um but to
your point more broadly yeah why why
focus on dopamine um dopamine has become
a kind of common currency for
neuroscientists to measure the
phenomenology of addiction um many
addictive substances work by different
chemical Cascades but the final common
pathway for all reinforcing substances
and behaviors that are addictive uh is
to release dopamine in the brain's
reward pathway the more dopamine that is
released and the faster that it's
released the more likely that substance
or behavior is to be addictive but
certainly serotonin is a is an important
mediator for example when we think about
love and sex addiction that definitely
works on the serotonergic system social
media addiction works on the
serotonergic system but again the the
the final common pathway is to release
dopemine so that's why dopamine is sort
of a focus of neuroscientific
research oh I see okay so let's get into
more practical discussion then um you
talk about addiction obviously that's
your focus on your book you have all
these case studies in your book of
people who have suffered from addiction
very interesting um and insightful I was
going to ask you now what have you seen
works on a practical level someone who
is suffering from the some of the stuff
that you've mentioned let's say drug
addiction alcohol addiction let's say um
marijuana addiction let's let's say sex
addiction or pornography addic
how would you help somebody in that
situation well first of all it's
important to individualize the treatment
for that person because you know
addiction is a spectrum disorder so you
can be mildly moderately or severely
addicted you can even have kind of a
pre- addictive state where you're not
quite crossing over what is addiction
before we continue I mean how would you
how would you define it yeah yeah great
so addiction is the continued compulsive
use of a substance or a behavior despite
harm to self and or others sometimes
that's a harm that the individual who is
addicted can see and appreciate
sometimes it's a harm that they can't
appreciate importantly we we base the
diagnosis on something we call
phenomenology that is to say patterns of
behavior through time there is no brain
scan or blood test to diagnose addiction
it's really based on pattern recognition
of these continued compulsive behaviors
that lead to is there a threshold
something must meet before it meets the
bar of addiction so for example at what
point do we this might sound um silly
but at what point do we call somebody a
alcoholic or at what point do we call
them a an addict to pornography or an
addict to anything is there a number
that must be reached or is it quite
subjective I mean both um in the sense
that the diagnostic and statistical
Manual of mental disorders has 11
criteria um which need to be met in
order to you know diagnose addiction if
you meet two of those criteria two to
three you have a mild form of addiction
if you meet four to five you have a
moderate form and six or more you have a
severe form but determining who meets
those criteria is highly subjective
right you could go to 10 different
psychiatrists and maybe they would give
you 10 different um you know gradations
on the mild moderate severe Spectrum or
maybe they would think no you're not on
that Spectrum at all um is that those
numbers that you mentioned uh what's the
time period and what's the frequency and
what kind of addiction are we talking
about well first of all let me just say
that drug and alcohol
addiction um is something that's clearly
established within the diagnostic and
statistical manual mental disorders
process or behavioral addictions these
are addictions to things that we do
rather than things that we put into our
bodies um only gambling addiction has
made it into the diagnostic and
statistical manual so sex addiction and
pornography addiction in that has not
made made it in there no not yet not yet
in there social
media well I I think it will eventually
be in there because I I I am I am I to
me it's non uh ambiguous that these are
Bonafide addictions the the the same
Natural History or course of disease
that we see with drug and alcohol
addiction we see with sex pornography
compulsive masturbation addiction so I
think all of that will eventually make
its way but at this point there's still
controversy and people some people you
know in the field of mental health don't
believe that you can get addicted to sex
they think that it's a like a social
construct overlaid upon um you know the
sexual behaviors that interpret
someone's lifestyle Choice as an
addiction when in fact is can I ask you
on that because yeah H how would you
know if someone the six
I so
the continued compulsive use despite
harm to self and or others so I'll just
give you like a little you know um
somebody who read my book wrote me quite
a sort of a nasty note saying that I was
harming people specifically you know in
the book there's a case of a a patient
who has a severe sex addiction to the
point where he makes a masturbation
machine
that he can allow other people to
manipulate um his genitalia using
electricity remotely extremely dangerous
right so the potential for harm to him
is great just even physical harm but
also it destroyed his marriage it was
destroying his professional life it was
contributing to anxiety and depression
and ultimately he wanted to end his life
so he came to me wanting help for a
behavior that he wanted to stop and was
not and not able to stop on his own so
to me he's a very clear case of
continued compulsive use despite harm to
self and or others right um so what if
the person is just is like one aspect of
that definition was um was in place but
the other aspect wasn't so for example
if someone is continually um having
intercourse and to the point where if
they were by themselves and they
couldn't have access to that that they
would feel a with kind of withdrawal
impact it would have a psychological
impact but it doesn't
necessarily U the act of intercourse say
wouldn't have um harm a harmful effect
on themselves or on another person would
you still consider that to be an
addiction or no no I wouldn't no really
okay yeah so so I mean if that person
you know was engaging in a sexual
behavior that was not harming other
people and was not perceived by that
person to be harming themselves even if
when they stop they experience some
degree of physical withdrawal as we
typically would when we stop a physical
behavior that we've been doing
habitually um you know but that but
that's not addiction right that's that's
that's that doesn't meet the criteria I
see now it could be it could be though
that that person was actually harming
somebody else and didn't realize it or
didn't see it with the kind of clarity
that they might have seen had they not
been caught up in addiction or maybe
they were actually harming themselves
but again didn't see it clearly so these
this is where the art and the science
meet sure and and that's what I was
going to say to you because the point
about harm is um is also deeply
psychological because if somebody for
example has a moral um reasoning for not
doing something obviously in the
religious tradition that's very you
mentioned a few case studies in fact of
religious people Catholics and others
who consider something to be wrong so
therefore they they um they feel guilt
if they do it and in a sense that can be
conceived as a kind of harm so maybe yes
yes absolutely so part of what happens
in addiction is people act outside of
their own moral compass and that causes
them moral injury right and causes them
spiritual injury um you know it's a we
often talk about addiction as a bioc
psychosocial spiritual disease um and
you know all of those elements are part
of it so then um that that would
probably like impact something like
pornography addiction a lot more because
so I can imagine a lot of people
watching pornography and being
compulsive users of it but um you know a
group of or subset people could say that
well there's nothing in my morality
which doesn't permit such a thing
whereas a group or a subset of other
people would say that actually this is
causing me a lot of guilt and anxiety
and depression and for these people it
would be then addiction and for these
people it wouldn't be addiction
according to this definition yes
exactly okay so in that case let's stick
with with that because let's say these
behaviors um someone is addicted and
they do want to get rid of it um I'll
give you a couple of case studies or a
couple of things that people could be
addicted to and you tell me what you
think um I know this is very simplistic
and it's no no not at all these are
these are actually good these are good
questions you're getting at some of the
you know the finer nuanced points so for
example if someone is a you know
addicted to substances and your
specialism was opioids I think it was um
in the first well actually I treat all
addictions so not not just opioids yeah
um but say opio addiction or let's say
for example alcohol addiction or
anything else what would be the way
because you mentioned the AA the 12
steps of the AA right um are you a
believer of that of of the 12 steps of
the AA or what would be the way in which
you deal with that person who has a
substance uh problem well you're sort of
asking me to kind of condense the uh you
know the sort of the treatment of
addictive disorders you know in it's
hard to condense all that in five
minutes sure or or even 10 or even an
hour but you know broadly speaking I I
think it's it's important to
conceptualize addiction as a bioc
psychosocial disease that means that
there are biological components to the
disease both genetic risk factors in
Born risk factors plus the way that
people change their brains over time
after exposing themselves to the
reinforcing substance or behavior so
you've got a biological component you've
got a psychological component which
happens on many levels right you've got
the trauma that can come from uh being
addicted and the Fallout from that um
you've got other psychological factors
that may be contributing to that per
that's person's seeking you know
addictive substances and behaviors and
then you've got the social piece that's
the environmental piece we're a very um
social creatures and uh addiction moves
through populations like an infectious
disease with vectors so if you're living
in a place where everybody's using or a
lot of people are using or you're raised
in a family where using is modeled then
that contextual piece uh is going to
impact it and and we know that one of
the biggest risk factors for addiction
is simple access to a drug if you have
easy access you're more likely to try it
and more likely to get addicted I'll
leave the spiritual piece out that's
sometimes that we bring that in to but
just for now called biopsychosocial so
that means our interventions also need
to be potentially biological
psychological and social so just to give
examples for an opioid addiction a
biological intervention might be a
methadone maintenance program right or a
buprenorphine these are medications that
are evidence-based for the treatment of
addiction lots of placebo controlled
trials across decades and continents
showing that people with severe opioid
addiction who get on methodo maintenance
maintenance or buber morphine
maintenance have better outcomes than
people with severe opio addiction who do
not okay we'll leave that aside then
you've got psychological components this
is where once people get into some
degree of recovery kind of looking
deeply at what some of the psychological
reasons that might contribute to their
addictive behaviors I don't like to say
psychological reasons that cause
addictive behaviors because really
addictive substances cause addictive
behaviors you don't need to have a
psychological traum to explain it but
certainly traumas can contribute and
then so there you might do individual
Psychotherapy or group Psychotherapy and
then you've got your contextual or
social that's things like all of my
friends use and if I don't use I can't
hang out with my friends I have nothing
to do I'm completely bored that's where
Alcoholics Anonymous Narcotics Anonymous
help people reestablish a so sober
social network of non-using peers that
can then act as supports through the
sponsor ship program and working the 12
steps which is also a psychospiritual
program that helps people get into
recovery and there's evidence to support
uh the you know a a alcoholics
annonymous narcotics so that would be
sort of an example excellent so that's
more of with like substance what about
behavioral things so some of the things
you mentioned uh we mentioned in the
beginning so things like um porography
addiction sex addiction um any other
thing that you can imagine what what
would be would it be broadly the same
approach or would be a different
approach it's broadly the same approach
so for example someone in the early
stages of recovery from a sex
pornography or compulsive masturbation
addiction we might prescribe a selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitor why because
it turns out one of the side effects of
ssris is to decrease
libido decrease the sex drive so that
can help people with sort of a petitive
control around sexual impulses a
psychological intervention would be to
do group or individual Psychotherapy
talking about sort of their sexual
identity their sexual impulses and
Fantasies and experiences and trying to
understand that um and then you know the
the environmental or contextual would be
sexaholics anonymous sex addicts
anonymous these are 12-step groups sex
and porn addicts anonymous a lot of them
are online now to help people um also
you know often couples because there's a
lot of betrayal shame that happens with
a sex addiction so trying to get couples
to you know come back and in all of
these you know no matter what the drug
is the the early intervention except you
know in some cases is to get people to
abstain from their drug of choice long
enough to kind of reset reward Pathways
so when when we're talking about sex
addiction that that's where we encourage
people not to have any orgasms with
themselves or others for 30 days why 30
days because 30 days is about the amount
of time it takes to kind of reset reward
Pathways and get people out of that
state of constant
craving days of Ramadan that the Muslim
can can benefit from the yeah yeah I it
is really interesting that like
neuroscience and clinical experience
that points toward 30 days being kind of
the the magic number not where people
are cured of their addiction 30 days is
not enough to cure anybody um and in
essence it's a chronic relapsing
remitting disease that people
often have to face for their whole lives
but it is often enough to sort of get
people again out of that Vortex of
craving and every major religion of the
world as far as I can tell also has a
recommendation for about 30 days of
fasting from something whether it's
Ramadan or lent or you know other
Traditions that recommend that kind of
thing so what I find really interesting
near the end of your book is where you
speak about pain and pleasure and I've
seen some of your presentations uh
online as well where you where you talk
about this delicate balance between pain
and pleasure and one part of the uh the
book actually stuck out to me where you
mention that um you mention basically
that in order to we need to think of
embracing pain as a new way of dealing
with it in fact and you mention exposure
therapy obviously is a known
psychological
mechanism uh what how would you um now
we're living in the age of age overc
consumption how would you characterize
this how is it that can someone can
balance pain and pleasure uh practically
speaking right so I mean to me you know
in order to understand the modern
quandry or dilemma it's essential to
understand the basic Neuroscience of how
we process Pleasure and Pain sure and at
at the simplest level Pleasure and Pain
are collocated in the brain they work
like opposite sides of a balance when we
experience what part of the brain are we
talking here we're talking about the the
reward pathway the nucleus accumbens the
vental tegmental area these are deep you
know uh lyic brain emotion brain
structures that also communicate with
the prefrontal cortex which is the large
gray matter area behind our foreheads
the prefrontal cortex acts like the
brakes the nucleus accumbens acts like
the accelerator addiction is a problem
either with too little breaks or too
much accelerator but more importantly
Pleasure and Pain we are reflexively we
are evolved over millions of years of
evolution to reflexively approach
pleasure and avoid pain we don't have to
think about doing that our brains are
constantly working to address that goal
approach pleasure avoid pain in fact we
have to think about avoiding pleasure
and approaching pain that's a that's a
heavy cognitive load for us um and you
could argue well why would you want to
do that well our brains really evolve
for a world of scarcity and ever danger
where we had to work very hard for
scarce rewards that's not the world we
live in today we live in a world where
we're inundated with quick Pleasures you
mentioned a quote on this um and I found
it very uh poignant um I don't know who
you quoted but you mentioned it's like
cactuses in the rainforest in the
rainforest yeah right yeah so this do
you remember who who said that Tom fukin
he's actually a diabetes specialist but
it speaks to the same thing yeah that we
didn't the world consumtion and that
we're no longer having to work and be
resourceful in the same way as a cactus
would have to be in the desert right and
to understand why this is problematic
this world of overabundance it's It's
essential to understand the brain
mechanism sure that is is leading us to
approach pleasure and avoid pain and
essentially like a seesaw or a teeter
totter when we experience pleasure it's
one way but when we experience pain it's
the opposite the number one rule
governing this B balance is that it
wants to remain level it doesn't want to
be deviated for very long to the side of
pleasure or pain such that with any
deviation our brains will work very hard
to restore a level balance or what
neuroscientists call homeostasis and the
way our brains restore our level
balances first by tilting an equal and
opposite amount to whatever the initial
stimulus was so when we use an
intoxicant that releases dopamine our
balance tilts to the side of pleasure no
sooner has that happen then our brain
adapts I like to imagine that as these
little neuro adaptation Gremlins hopping
on the pain side of the balance to bring
it level again but the Gremlins like it
on the balance so they don't get off as
soon as we're level they stay on until
we're tilted and equal and opposite
amount to the side of pain that's the
come down the hangover or that moment of
craving if we wait long enough without
consuming the Gremlins hop off and
homeostasis or a level balance is
restored but if we continue to consume
our drug of choice over days to weeks to
months to years those Gremlins multiply
on the pain side of the balance and then
after a while we've changed our honic or
Joy set point now we need more of our
drug in more potent forms not to get
high but just to level the balance and
feel normal and when we're not using
we're walking around with a balance
tilted to the side of pain experiencing
craving anxiety irritability insomnia
dysphoria the universal symptoms of
withdrawal so how does that relate to
your
question about why pursue pain when
we're living in a world of overwhelming
overabundance we're constantly
bombarding our reward pathway with these
high dopamine rewards which means that
possibly most if not all of us are
walking around with a changed honic set
point uh finding that it's difficult to
take pleasure in anything at all and we
need more and more pleasure uh to feel
anything remotely resembling pleasure
which means that in a world of
overwhelming abundance what we need to
do is abstain from toxicants or at least
leave enough time in between for the
Gremlins to hop off and for homeostasis
to Resto be restored and intentionally
seek out pain because when we
intentionally press on the pain side
those Gremlins actually hop on the
pleasure side and tilt our balance to
the side of pleasure and we get dopamine
indirectly by paying for it up front an
example would be exercise so we know
that exercise is immediately toxic to
cells but what happens is when the body
senses injury starts to upregulate
feel-good neurotransmitters like
dopamine serotonin orpine our endogenous
opioids our endogenous canabo so we get
the runners high right we get that
little bump and we know that in
experiments for example where people
exercise or they immerse themselves in a
ice cold water bath or take the James
Bond shower that's the cold shower at
the end of the regular shower that dop
now that has I mean yes that's right
well and because because people get
doping from it and they get it
indirectly by paying for it up front
which makes it less vulnerable to the
problem of addiction not invulnerable
but less vulnerable and so you know we
get our dopamine it rises over the
latter half of exercise and it stays
elevated for hours afterwards before
going back down to Baseline it never
goes into that dopamine deficit state so
we don't accumulate Gremlins on the pain
side of the balance because they're
working over on the pleasure side so
that that's that's the example of this
idea that I did like it when you um when
you mentioned that and it was it was
very powerful and you um quoted some
classic philosophers like Socrates and
uh others in the helenistic period who
had um said the same thing really a long
time ago that yeah it seems like it's an
old um kind of understood philosophy
which is that really if you want to have
a balance in life this homostasis you
speak of you do have to pursue uh pain
um and exercise obviously is a great
example uh we would probably say fasting
is another I mean I've I've been fasting
today as well uh and the Islamic fast is
that you can't have food drink or engage
in sexual behavior at all and uh when I
when I ate the food so for all of all of
Ramadan you can't have sexual contact or
is it just during until sundown so From
Dawn till Dusk you can't do that got it
so after dusk until dawn again you can
you can do that okay but when I do eat
the food and drink water and other fluid
ID to be honest is like the best food
you've ever had because that's right do
you know what I mean and you can
probably explain that in the way that
the dopaminergic effect or ex you know
what I mean same kind of thing yeah um
so that that's one thing uh is there a
danger someone could ask to play Devil's
advoca is there a danger um in just
reducing human
satisfaction contentment uh whatever
call it to chemical processes like for
example whether we speak about um
whether we speak about dopamine
serotonin or anything else could there
be a danger in in doing that uh how
would you respond to someone asking that
question yeah I
mean I think anytime we simplify in
order to convey you know a fundamental
message there's a danger there right we'
oversimplified we've left out other
aspects um like meaning and purpose you
know we're not just some kind of you
know sort of mechanistic robot like
creatures you know who either have too
much dopamine or too little dopamine yes
and and plus you know the the whole
mechanistic
explanation um is just a Frank
oversimplification because
although Pleasure and Pain do work in
this opponent process um way to some
degree we also know that we can
experience Pleasure and Pain at the same
time for example when we eat spicy food
right that's both pleasurable
pleasurable and painful so yes
oversimplification or over over overd
doing like a kind of a
mechanistic um perspective on the brain
um you know should I think it can be
valuable um as long as we we know it's
it is an
oversimplification you mentioned few key
words that I very interesting um but you
also mentioned in your book that there's
this
Paradox the Paradox that you have high
inome
Nations um like Western Nations for
example European nations but also
nations in Asia um which we have the
money we have the resources now and we
in fact we have the ability to do things
at a quicker and faster pace and rate
than we probably ever had in human
history before we effectively lay people
in the life of kings in the past and um
that has had a paradoxical effect which
is um with all these studies that you've
cited it's actually made people in those
Nations more depressed so what do you
think is is the reason for that overc
consumption or could it be um a lack of
meaning as you mentioned now as well
could that also be a uh
reason there's no doubt at it's
multifactorial um and and you know this
kind of lack of meaning and purpose
social
dislocation uh economic uh
inequality multigenerational trauma
there are lots of you know things that
we could site contributing to our
growing discontent but what's striking
to me is that if you look at happiness
surveys uh people uh in the richest
nations of the world for the first time
ever are becoming less and less happy uh
which is different from how it was let's
say 25 years ago where you could clearly
track happiness surveys happiness going
up as Nations got wealthier around 25
years ago that changed and the
wealthiest nations in the world are now
uh you know are now home to a a growing
number of unhappy people same thing if
you sort of look at it through the lens
of Psychopathology rates of addiction
rates of well true rates of addiction
but also rates of anxiety depression are
going up all over the world but they're
going up fastest and the richest nations
of the world which are the same very
same places where people have the most
access to Modern mental health treatment
which suggests we're getting something
fundamentally wrong potentially about
how we intervene and so the hypothesis
in dopamin nation is that it is
overabundance and choice and quick fixes
and dopamine that is essentially uh
causing uh our growing
despair could there be said to be a
presupposition which um maybe is uh kind
of not being tackled which is that when
we speak about well in in Nations which
are like higher income Nations if you
like or higher GDP per capit Nations
whatever want way you want to put it
that that leads to less happiness
whatever it may be that happiness is
being seen as the most important thing
and what the question is why should why
should we want to be happy in the first
place is why is happiness the key
emotion that everyone is striving for is
happiness a longevous type of happiness
in fact what we should be opting for in
the first place or is there something
else maybe like contentment or
satisfaction or some other word that can
be used an adjective which would be uh
better even or more sought after than
happiness
yeah I mean I do I do think that you
know along with the phenomenon of
paradoxical
overabundance um and this striving for
pleasure which really doesn't give
pleasure is a is a cultural narrative
that says we must be happy we should be
happy if we're not happy something's
wrong with our brains we're ill
something's wrong with our our life we
need to change our life so a kind of
expectation for happiness is is
something that certainly is true in
American culture for example and I think
it also goes along with kind of a
successful capitalist system yes because
really the ultimate capitalist is an
addict right I mean if for if you
consider sort of taking successful
capitalism and taking it to its Pinnacle
we would all be compulsive over
consumers all the time um so yeah I but
I just think it's also it's it's sort of
part of the phenomenon is that the
narrative changes too um you know this
narrative becomes sort of a narrative of
must be happy otherwise something's
wrong with my life if someone came to
you um and I'll make this the last
question because I know you you're tight
on time is someone came to me with an
addiction problem and said I've got
these substance addiction problems I've
got these behavioral addiction problems
um and you only had a few moments to
spare to give them
words of advice and wisdom what would uh
those words of advice and wisdom
be many times people with an addiction
believe that they only have two options
they can either keep using their drug
and be miserable or they can stop using
their drug and be miserable what my job
is to convey to them that there is a
third way where they can stop using
their drug or potentially at some point
down the future moderate or use less of
their drug and and find
a place where they're not constantly
miserable so holding out hope that there
is this this sort of uh way to give up
the drug give up the addictive behaviors
and still find a life worth living and
in fact find a life that's uh you know
even better than it might have been had
they never had the addiction in the
first place fantastic excellent well I
would tell them is um go and read a
fantastic book that I've read ation
which uh is available isn't it people
can get that on on Amazon and you can
listen to it as an audio book and
different kinds of things um thank you
so much for enlightening us with and
edifying us with some of your wise words
um it's it's really good what you've
done here in explaining the mechanisms
the physiological mechanisms of how this
works I think it will be extremely
helpful uh to people uh who are
suffering from these addictions and um
of course they are going to read your
book as well we' love to have you on the
show some other time um and U well thank
you I I appreciate it that's very kind
of you and yeah my goal is to teach
people and get the message out and help
people so I'm I'm really happy to be
able to have you know your platform to
potentially do that thank you you're
welcome and thank you very much uh with
that guys we will be concluding the show
and you are welcome to go ahead and buy
uh Dr Dy his book and see many of her
things she's done many podcasts online
as well with Dr huberman uh Dr Andrew
huberman and she's done various
presentations uh and of course her book
as well thank you for
that hey you are you wasting your time
on social media again your brothers and
sisters in Islam net from Norway are
establishing a Masid a DA Center
establishing a Masid to convey The
Message of Islam is one of the best
Deeds a Muslim can do there's a huge
need for it in Norway you know this and
I know this so that makes the reward
even greater so give generously and
Allah will give you even
more